Procedure
    In a 100ml round bottom flask place 2.5g of pure methyl benzoate.Support a separatery funnel containing a mixture of 8 ml of concentrated H2SO4 and 5 ml of concentrated HNO3
    cool the flask in a icebath to 0-10 C and then run in the nitrating mixture with stirring maintaining the temperature within 5-15 C.Addition of nitrating mixture requires one hour
    Continue the stirring for 15 more minutes and pour the mixture into crushed ice. Filter the crude m-nitro benzoate at pump and wash it with cold water. Transfer the solid into
    a 500 ml beaker,heat and stir it with 2ml of ice cold water,methanol in order to remove a small amount of the ortho isomeride and other impurites.Filter the cooled
    mixture with suction.Wash it with 1ml of icecold methanol and dry it in the air.Practically m-nitro benzoate melts at 75-76 C.It is sufficiently pure for conversion into
    m-nitro benzoic acid.The pure ester melting point 78 C maybe obtained by re-crystallization from an equal weight of methanol.


Hydrolysis of methyl m-nitro benzoate to m-nitro benzoic acid
    Weigh 1gm of NaoH,dissolve in 4ml of water taken in a beaker and allow it to cool in round bottom flask.Take m-nitro benzoate and 4 ml of water.Transfer NaoH solution 
    into the round bottom flask equipped with a reflux condenser. Heat the mixture to boiling until the oily layer disappears.Cool and dilute the reaction mixture with 4ml
    of water followed by 3ml of concentrated HCl with constant stirring.Allow to cool to room temperature,filter the crude acid at pump.Wash it with a little water, then 
    drain well.Recrystallise from alcohol,pale brownish colored m-nitro benzoic acid is obatined.

Preparation of 2,4 dinitrophenyl hydrazine from 2,4 dinitro choloro benzene
    Aim: To prepare 2,4 dinitrophenyl hydrazine from 2,4 dinitro choloro benzene
 Chemicals required
 Procedure
    Step 1: 
        Preparation  of 2,4 dinitrochloro benzene 
            In a 250ml RBF, 2.5 g ortho chloro nitro benzene is taken to which 8ml of conc. H2SO4 was added. This mixture was cooled to 0C in an ice bath to this mixture.
            Chilled nitrating mixture containing 5 ml of conc.HNO3 and 8 ml conc. H2SO4 is added drop wise for a period of 20 minutes with constant stirring.After the Addition,
            allow the mixture to attain room temperature and then it is refluxed for an hour using condenser.Then the mixture is cooled and poured into crushed ice taken in a 
            beaker.The obtained precipitae was filtered ,dried and obtained product is recrystallize using ethanol.The melting point of compound is determined.
            Step 2:
                Preparation of 2,4 dinitrophenyl hydrazine 
                    2.5 g of 2,4 dinitrochloro benzene was taken in a 100ml RBF which was dissolved in 10ml of ethylene glycol.The contents in RBF were warmed to obtain a 
                    clear solution.The flask was cooled in an ice bath. To this add 1.4ml of acqueous hydrazine with constant stirring.Addition is done in such a way that
                    temperature is maintained below 15C.Then 5ml of CH3OH is added and the flask is heated on a water bath for 15 minutes.The mixture is cooled and the solid
                    obatined is collected.The precipitate is washed with little CH3OH and dried melting point is determined.
   